Generalization and overfitting are very
important concepts in machine learning.
We will cover them in
the next three lectures.
After this video you will be able
to define what overfitting is,
describe how overfitting is
related to generalization, and
explain why overfitting should be avoided.
Before we look at generalization and
overfitting, let's first define some terms
that we will need to know to
discuss errors in classification.
Recall that a machine learning model
maps the input it receives to an output.
For a classification model, the model's
output is the predicted class label for
the input variables and
the true class label is the target.
Then if the classifier predicts
the correct classes label for
a sample, that is a success.
If the predicted class label is
different from the true class label,
then that is an error.
The error rate, then, is the percentage
of errors made over the entire data set.
That is, it is the number of errors
divided by the total number of samples
in a data set.
Error rate is also known as
misclassification rate, or simply error.
In our lesson on classification we discuss
that there is a training phase in which
the model is built, and a testing phase in
which the model is applied to new data.
The model is built using training data and
evaluated on test data.
The training and
test data are two different data sets.
The goal in building a machine learning
model is to have the model perform well
on training, as well as test data.
Error rate, or simply error, on the
training data is refered to as training
error, and the error on test data
is referred to as test error.
The error on the test data is
an indication of how well the classifier
will perform on new data.
This is known as generalization.
Generalization refers to how well
your model performs on new data,
that is data not used to train the model.
You want your model to
generalize well to new data.
If your model generalizes well, then
it will perform well on data sets that
are similar in structure
to the training data, but
doesn't contain exactly the same
samples as in the training set.
Since the test error indicates how well
your model generalizes to new data,
note that the test error is also
called generalization error.
A related concept to
generalization is overfitting.
If your model has very
low training error but
high generalization error,
then it is overfitting.
This means that the model has learned to
model the noise in the training data,
instead of learning the underlying
structure of the data.
These plots illustrate what
happens when a model overfits.
Training samples are shown as points, and
the input to output mapping that the model
has learned is indicated as a curve.
The plot on the left shows that the model
has learned the underlying structure of
the data, as the curve follows
the trend of the sample point as well.
The plot on the right,
however, shows that the model has learned
to model the noise in a data set.
The model tries to capture
every sample point,
instead of the general trend
of the samples together.
The training error and
the generalization error are plotted
together, during model training.
What is the connection between
overfitting and generalization?
A model that overfits will not
generalize well to new data.
So the model will do well on just
the data it was trained on, but
given a new data set,
it will perform poorly.
A classifier that performs well
on just the training data set
will not be very useful.
So it is essential that the goal of good
generalization performance is kept in mind
when building a model.
A problem related to
overfitting is underfitting.
Overfitting occurs when the model is
fitting to the noise in the training data.
This results in low training error and
high test error.
Underfitting on the other hand,
occurs when the model has not
learned the structure of the data.
This results in high training error and
high test error.
Both are undesirable,
since both mean that the model will
not generalize well to new data.
Overfitting generally occurs when
a model is too complex, that is,
it has too many parameters relative
to the number of training samples.
So to avoid overfitting, the model needs
to be kept as simple as possible, and yet
still solve the input/output mapping for
the given data set.
We will discuss methods for
avoiding overfitting in
the next couple of lectures.
In summary, overfitting is when your model
has learned the noise in the training data
instead of the underlying
structure of the data.
You want to avoid overfitting so that your
model will generalize well to new data.